>>ON THIS EDITION FOR SUNDAY,
DECEMBER 25th:
A RUSSIAN PLANE EN ROUTE TO
SYRIA CRASHES INTO THE BLACK
SEA; IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE EARLY HISTORY OF BLACK FILM
PIONEERS; AND, HOW INSECTS
MIGHT BECOME THE NEXT SUPER-
FOOD.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
SEARCHERS SCOURED THE BLACK SEA
THIS EVENING LOOKING FOR
SURVIVORS AND WRECKAGE FROM THE
CRASH OF AN AGING RUSSIAN
AIRLINER OPERATED BY THE
MILITARY.
BUT ALL 92 PEOPLE ON BOARD ARE
FEARED DEAD, INCLUDING MORE THAN
SIXTY PERFORMERS FROM THE WORLD-
FAMOUS RED ARMY CHOIR.
THE TUPOLEV-TU-154 AIRCRAFT,
BUILT IN 1983, HAD JUST TAKEN
OFF IN GOOD WEATHER FROM THE
BLACK SEA RESORT OF SOCHI,
HEADED FOR SYRIA, WHEN IT
DISAPPEARED FROM RADAR AFTER
ONLY TWO MINUTES.
RUSSIA'S TRANSPORT MINISTER SAID
ALL POSSIBLE CAUSES OF THE CRASH
ARE BEING INVESTIGATED,
INCLUDING TERRORISM.
THE PLANE WAS EN ROUTE TO A BASE
IN SYRIA WHERE THE CHORUS WAS TO
HAVE ENTERTAINED RUSSIAN TROOPS.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
WENT ON NATIONWIDE TELEVISION TO
DECLARE TOMORROW A NATIONAL DAY
OF MOURNING.
POPE FRANCIS DELIVERED HIS
TRADITIONAL CHRISTMAS MESSAGE
TODAY TO 40,000 PEOPLE GATHERED
IN ST. PETER'S SQUARE.
THE POPE CALLED FOR A PERMANENT
END TO THE FIGHTING IN SYRIA,
AND FOR MIGRANTS NEVER TO BE
FORGOTTEN.
HE ALSO PLEADED WITH ISRAELIS
AND PALESTINIANS TO PUT ASIDE
HATE AND, "WRITE A NEW PAGE OF
HISTORY."
THIS IS FRANCIS' FOURTH
CHRISTMAS CELEBRATION SINCE
BECOMING POPE IN 2013.
SECURITY WAS TIGHT FOLLOWING
LAST WEEK'S TERRORIST TRUCK
ATTACK IN BERLIN.
IN A HIGHLY UNUSUAL MOVE,
ISRAEL'S PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU TODAY SUMMONED VARIOUS
AMBASSADORS TO REPRIMAND THEIR
COUNTRIES FOR VOTING IN FAVOR
OF A U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION THAT CONDEMNED
ISRAELI SETTLEMENTS.
ACCORDING TO ISRAELI NEWS
REPORTS, NETANYAHU ALSO ORDERED
ISRAELI DIPLOMATS TO SUSPEND
CONTACTS WITH THESE NATIONS
UNTIL PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP
TAKES OFFICE.
THE CONTROVERSIAL RESOLUTION
PASSED FRIDAY ONLY AFTER THE
UNITED STATES ABSTAINED INSTEAD
OF USING ITS VETO POWER.
NETANYAHU ALSO SUMMONED U.S.
AMBASSADOR DAN SHAPIRO FOR A
MEETING.
AT HIS CABINET MEETING,
NETANYAHU DENOUNCED THE SECURITY
COUNCIL VOTE.
>> OVER DECADES, AMERICAN
ADMINISTRATIONS AND ISRAELI
GOVERNMENTS HAVE DISAGREED ABOUT
SETTLEMENTS, BUT WE AGREED THAT
THE SECURITY COUNCIL WAS NOT THE
PLACE TO RESOLVE THIS ISSUE.
WE KNEW THAT GOING THERE WOULD
MAKE NEGOTIATIONS HARDER AND
DRIVE PEACE FURTHER AWAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE DEMOCRATIC
PARTY CALLS PRESIDENT-ELECT
DONALD TRUMP'S MOVE TO CLOSE HIS
NAMESAKE FOUNDATION BEFORE
TAKING OFFICE A, "WILTED FIG
LEAF."
IN A STATEMENT, THE DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL COMMITTEE SAID,
"SHUTTERING A CHARITY IS NO
SUBSTITUTE FOR DIVESTING FROM
HIS FOR-PROFIT BUSINESS AND
PUTTING THE ASSETS IN A BLIND
TRUST."
THE FOUNDATION HAS COME UNDER
SCRUTINY BY THE NEW YORK
ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE, WHICH
ORDERED IT TO STOP SOLICITING
DONATIONS IN NEW YORK IN
OCTOBER.
A SPOKESPERSON FOR THE STATE
ATTORNEY GENERAL SAID ITS
INVESTIGATION IS ONGOING, AND
THE CHARITY CANNOT BE LEGALLY
DISSOLVED UNTIL THE PROBE IS
COMPLETE.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'VE OFFICIALLY
ENTERED THE AWARDS SEASON, WITH
THE NOMINATIONS ANNOUNCED FOR
THE GOLDEN GLOBES AND THE SCREEN
ACTORS GUILD EARLIER THIS MONTH.
AMONG THOSE NOMINATED ARE BLACK
FILMMAKERS, ACTORS AND FILMS
DEALING WITH ISSUES FACING THE
BLACK COMMUNITY.
DIRECTOR BARRY JENKINS' FILM,
"MOONLIGHT;" ACTOR DENZEL
WASHINGTON IN "FENCES;" AND THE
HISTORICAL FILM "LOVING," ABOUT
AN INTERRACIAL COUPLE, TO NAME A
FEW.
THESE FILMS ARE PART OF A
LINEAGE THAT'S LARGELY UNKNOWN,
DATING BACK 100 YEARS TO THE
BEGINNING OF AMERICAN CINEMA.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KARLA
MURTHY REPORTS ON THE EFFORT TO
BRING THAT HISTORY TO LIGHT.
>> Reporter: IN THE EARLY PART
OF 20th CENTURY, WITH RACIAL
SEGREGATION STILL IN PLACE IN
MUCH OF THE U.S., BLACK
FILMMAKERS MADE MOVIES FOR BLACK
AUDIENCES, OUTSIDE THE WHITE
HOLLYWOOD MAINSTREAM.
THEY PRODUCED AROUND 500 SO-
CALLED "RACE FILMS," BUT MOST
ARE LOST TO HISTORY.
>> NEWLY MASTERED FROM ARCHIVAL
FILM ELEMENTS...
>> Reporter: TO PRESERVE
AMERICA'S FIRST "INDEPENDENT"
CINEMA, THIS YEAR, THE COMPANY
KINO LORBER RELEASED A FIVE-DISC
COLLECTION COMBINING 20 HOURS OF
THESE FILMS, CALLED "THE
PIONEERS OF AFRICAN-AMERICAN
CINEMA."
THE COLLECTION OF 16 FEATURE
FILMS AND SHORTS-- MAINLY FROM
THE 1920s AND '30s-- INCLUDES
COMEDIES, DRAMAS, AND
DOCUMENTARIES.
THEY NOT ONLY STARRED BLACK
ACTORS, THE FILMS WERE OFTEN
WRITTEN, DIRECTED, AND PRODUCED
BY AFRICAN AMERICANS.
EXECUTIVE PRODUCER PAUL MILLER,
A MUSICIAN ALSO KNOWN AS DJ
SPOOKY, RAISED MONEY FOR THE
PROJECT INITIALLY THROUGH A
KICKSTARTER CAMPAIGN.
>> AND I'D LIKE TO ASK YOU TO
HELP US OUT.
WE HELPED THEM RAISE A LITTLE
BIT UNDER MAYBE $100,000, JUST,
YOU KNOW, IN A COUPLE, LIKE A
WEEK AND SOME CHANGE.
AND I LOVE TO THINK OF IT AS A
FESTIVAL IN A BOX.
>> Reporter: SO "THE NEW YORK
TIMES" CALLED THIS PROJECT--
THIS IS WHAT IT SAID ABOUT IT,
"FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF CINEMA
HISTORY, AND AMERICAN HISTORY
FOR THAT MATTER, THERE HAS NEVER
BEEN A MORE SIGNIFICANT VIDEO
RELEASE.
SO WHY IS THIS COLLECTION SO
SIGNIFICANT?
>> WELL, THE INTERESTING THING
ABOUT AMERICAN HISTORY IS WE
HAVE WHAT I CALL SELECTIVE
AMNESIA.
AND AMERICANS LOVE TO FORGET.
LIKE, PEOPLE, "WHAT KOREAN WAR?"
AND "DID WE EVER OCCUPY THE
PHILIPPINES?"
SO PUTTING THE BOX SET TOGETHER
WAS KIND OF A SITUATION OF
RECLAIMING THESE HIDDEN
HISTORIES OF VERY POSITIVE, AND
PRO-- WHAT I CALL MULTICULTURAL
VISIONS OF THIS HISTORY OF
AMERICAN CINEMA, WHICH IS
USUALLY, AGAIN, VERY WHITE--
WHITE-WASHED.
>> Reporter: HOW REVOLUTIONARY
WAS IT AT THAT TIME THAT THESE
FILMS WERE ACTUALLY ABLE TO GET
MADE AND SEEN?
>> YOU'VE GOT TO REMEMBER IT WAS
INCREDIBLE THAT AFRICAN
AMERICANS SAW THEMSELVES ON THE
SCREEN.
USUALLY, MOST PORTRAYALS OF
AFRICAN AMERICANS IN THE LARGER
WHITE CULTURE WERE MEANT TO BE
VERY DEROGATORY.
SO BY RECLAIMING THAT SPACE IN
THE CULTURE, YOU COULD SHOW
POSITIVE IMAGES OF BLACK PEOPLE
OUTSIDE OF THE WHITE CONTEXT.
>> Reporter: MILLER SAYS
MAINSTREAM MOVIES PORTRAYED
AFRICAN AMERICANS-- OFTEN BY
WHITES IN BLACK-FACE-- AS
UNINTELLIGENT AND BUMBLING, OR
EVIL, DANGEROUS VILLAINS.
BY CONTRAST, IN THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN-MADE RACE FILMS, BLACK
CHARACTERS OFTEN WERE HEROIC,
INTELLIGENT, AND ROMANTIC.
TEACHERS, DETECTIVES, COWBOYS--
ROLES HOLLYWOOD RESERVED FOR
WHITES.
TAKE THE EARLIEST FILM IN THE
BOX SET, THE 1915 SLAPSTICK
COMEDY, "TWO KNIGHTS OF
VAUDEVILLE."
IN THE 11-MINUTE SHORT, THE TWO
MAIN CHARACTERS FIND THEATER
TICKETS AND END UP IN THE BEST
SEATS IN THE HOUSE, WHICH WOULD
HAVE BEEN FOR WHITES.
>> AT THAT TIME, IT MUST HAVE
BEEN SHOCKING AND WILD.
AND IT MUST HAVE ALSO BEEN VERY
TICKLING TO THE AUDIENCE, AND
PEOPLE MUST HAVE THOUGHT IT WAS
HILARIOUS.
SO, IT WAS A REAL TREASURE TO
FIND THAT ONE.
>> Reporter: "THE BLOOD OF
JESUS," FROM 1941, IS A DEEPLY
RELIGIOUS FILM ABOUT A WOMAN ON
HER DEATHBED WHO'S HAVING A
CRISIS OF FAITH.
SHOT ON LOCATION IN TEXAS, IT
WAS WRITTEN AND DIRECTED BY
SPENCER WILLIAMS, WHO ALSO
STARRED IN THE FILM.
"THE BLOOD OF JESUS" WAS ONE OF
THE MOST SUCCESSFUL RACE MOVIES
EVER MADE, AND WAS ADDED TO THE
NATIONAL FILM REGISTRY AT THE
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS IN 1991.
SO WAS THAT KIND OF FILM JUST
NONEXISTENT AT THE TIME?
>> THOSE KINDS OF PORTRAYALS OF
AFRICAN AMERICANS WITHIN THE
CONTEXT OF SPIRITUALITY AS
WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF A COMMUN--
A POSITIVE VISION OF COMMUNITY
AND RELIGIOSITY, THEY WEREN'T
AROUND.
>> Reporter: THE SET ALSO
CONTAINS NINE FILMS BY DIRECTOR
OSCAR MICHEAUX, A ONE-TIME
PULLMAN TRAIN PORTER-TURNED-
SELF-TAUGHT, PROLIFIC FILMMAKER.
>> OSCAR MICHEAUX WAS MOSTLY
CONSIDERED TO BE THE FOUNDATION
D.N.A. OF AFRICAN AMERICAN
CINEMA, BECAUSE AGAIN, HE WAS
INDEPENDENT.
HE DEALT WITH TOPICS AND THEMES
THAT WERE DIRECTLY RELATED TO
BLACK EXPERIENCES AND WITH A
POWERFUL STATEMENT.
>> Reporter: MICHEAUX TACKLED
ISSUES LIKE RACISM, LYNCHINGS,
INTERRACIAL RELATIONSHIPS, AND
POVERTY FROM A BLACK
PERSPECTIVE.
HIS FILMS WERE OFTEN A DIRECT
RESPONSE TO THE EARLIER,
MONUMENTAL FILM BY D.W.
GRIFFITH, "THE BIRTH OF A
NATION," WHICH NEGATIVELY
PORTRAYED BLACKS AND GLORIFIED
THE KU KLUX KLAN.
BY CONTRAST, MICHEAUX'S "WITHIN
OUR GATES," FROM 1920, THE
EARLIEST SURVIVING FEATURE FILM
DIRECTED BY AN AFRICAN AMERICAN,
THE HEROINE IS A MIXED RACE
WOMAN NAMED SYLVIA, WHO GOES TO
THE NORTH TO RAISE MONEY FOR A
SCHOOL FOR POOR BLACK CHILDREN
IN THE SOUTH.
>> IN "WITHIN OUR GATES," THE
MIXED-RACE CHARACTER REALLY IS
VIEWED AS A WARM, AND SUPPORTIVE
PERSON.
IN "BIRTH OF A NATION," A MIXED-
RACE PERSON IS VIEWED AS
BETRAYING BOTH RACES.
THE MULATTO, THE MIXED-RACE
PERSON, IS A SCHEMER.
THEY'RE FOOLING THE WHITES, AND
THEY'RE USING THE BLACKS.
AND THE IDEA OF BEING BIRACIAL
OR MULTIRACIAL WAS VIEWED AS
KIND OF A DISRUPTION OF THE
ESTABLISHED ORDER.
>> Reporter: WHAT KIND OF ROLE
DO YOU SEE THE FILMS IN THIS
COLLECTION PLAYING, IN AMERICA
TODAY WITHIN THIS CONTEXT?
>> I THINK POST-2016 ELECTION,
WE REALLY NEED TO ALL TAKE SOME
PERSPECTIVE ABOUT RACIAL
POLITICS AND THE ANXIETY OF
DIFFERENT SEGMENTS OF THE
POPULATION ABOUT BEING LEFT
BEHIND, OR LOWER INCOME WHITES
WHO, ONE COULD ARGUE, THE
ELECTION WAS ABOUT THEIR
ECONOMIC ANXIETIES.
ON THE OTHER HAND, WITH AFRICAN
AMERICAN CULTURE, AFTER SEEING
AN EIGHT YEARS OF AN AFRICAN
AMERICAN PRESIDENT, WE ALSO NEED
TO UNDERSTAND THAT THERE'S BEEN
A LONG HISTORY OF POSITIVE
IMAGES OF AFRICAN AMERICANS.
SO THE BOX SET IS MORE IMPORTANT
THAN EVER, PRECISELY BECAUSE IT
LOOKS AT THE ARCHIVE.
AND MANY OF THESE FILMS WERE
LOST.
MANY OF THESE FILMS WERE
DIFFICULT TO FIND.
AND BY RESTORING THEM, AND
PUTTING THEM IN A BOXSET, ONE
PLACE, ONE STOP SHOP, I THINK IT
GIVES PEOPLE A POWERFUL TOOL TO
LOOK AT THE HISTORY OF CINEMA,
AGAIN NOT JUST AFRICAN AMERICAN,
BUT OVERALL.
>>Sreenivasan: IF YOU'RE
LOOKING FOR BOOK SUGGESTIONS
THIS HOLIDAY SEASON, THE
NEWSHOUR STAFF HAS MADE A LIST
OF 31 MUST-READS.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: JUST THIS PAST
WEEK, A UNITED NATIONS REPORT
HIGHLIGHTED THAT 2016 WAS THE
DEADLIEST YEAR FOR MIGRANTS
CROSSING THE MEDITERRANEAN.
MORE THAN 5,000 MIGRANTS HAVE
DIED THIS YEAR TRYING TO MAKE
THE CROSSING FROM THE MIDDLE
EAST AND NORTH AFRICA TO EUROPE.
EVEN FOR THOSE WHO DO MAKE IT,
MANY ARE NOT WELCOMED WITH OPEN
ARMS, BUT INSTEAD VIEWED WITH
DISTRUST AND FRUSTRATION OVER
WHETHER OR NOT THEY CAN BE
HOUSED, FED, EMPLOYED, AND
INTEGRATED.
HOWEVER, ONE SMALL TOWN IN ITALY
HAS A VERY DIFFERENT, FRIENDLY
POSTURE.
THE TOWN IS CALLED RIACE, AND
HERE IS A LOOK AT THE STORY
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRISTOPHER
LIVESAY BROUGHT US BACK IN
APRIL.
>> Reporter: IT'S A SHORT, TEN-
MINUTE DRIVE UP THE COAST IN
ITALY'S SOUTHERNMOST REGION OF
CALABRIA, TO THE HILLTOP TOWN OF
RIACE.
AT FIRST GLANCE, IT SEEMS
TYPICAL OF A TOWN DATING BACK TO
MEDIEVAL TIMES.
THERE ARE NARROW, WINDING
STREETS AND A 16th-CENTURY
CHURCH IN THE MAIN SQUARE.
BUT THERE'S SOMETHING VERY
ATYPICAL ABOUT RIACE THESE DAYS.
WHILE MUCH OF EUROPE IS REACTING
WARILY TO MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES
FROM THE MIDDLE EAST, SOUTH
ASIA, AND AFRICA, RIACE WELCOMES
THEM... WITH A SMILE.
>> HEY, BON GIORNO.
>> Reporter: DANIEL YABOAH IS
ORIGINALLY FROM GHANA.
"I'VE KNOWN HIM FOR MANY YEARS,"
THIS WOMAN SAYS.
"HIS CHILDREN WERE BORN HERE."
A FAMILIAR FACE HERE IN RIACE,
YABOAH GOES HOUSE TO HOUSE
COLLECTING TRASH AND RECYCLABLES
ALONG WITH HIS "TRUSTY DONKEY."
HE'S BEEN HERE SEVEN-AND-A-HALF
YEARS.
HE SAYS HE WAS FORCED TO FLEE
DEATH THREATS IN GHANA AFTER HIS
WIFE CONVERTED FOR HIM FROM
ISLAM TO CHRISTIANITY.
YOU HAVE A LIFE HERE?
>> YEAH, OF COURSE, WE HAVE A
LIFE HERE, AND THE PEOPLE HERE
GIVE US A CHANCE TO FEEL LIKE
HOME.
>> Reporter: MORE THAN JUST A
HANDFUL OF REFUGEES LIVE HERE.
OF RIACE'S 1,800 RESIDENTS,
ABOUT 400, OR 22%, ARE NON-
ITALIANS FROM MORE THAN 20
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES-- A FACT
PROUDLY DISPLAYED ON WELCOME
SIGNS.
FOR MAYOR LUCANO, HELPING
REFUGEES SETTLE HERE IS NOT JUST
THE RIGHT THING TO DO, IT'S
PRACTICAL.
WHAT WOULD THE TOWN BE LIKE
WITHOUT REFUGEES RIGHT NOW?
>> (translated): SIMPLY PUT,
RIACE WOULD NO LONGER EXIST.
>> Reporter: THAT'S BECAUSE BY
THE 1990s, THIS ONCE-THRIVING
TOWN OF 2,500 PEOPLE WAS
BECOMING A GHOST TOWN--
SUFFERING THE FATE OF SO MANY
SMALL OLD TOWNS IN EUROPE.
ITS POPULATION HAD DROPPED
ALMOST IN HALF, AS YOUNG PEOPLE
MOVED AWAY TO FIND JOBS IN
CITIES AND LEFT BEHIND EMPTY
HOUSES AND SHUTTERED BUSINESSES.
THE ONE PUBLIC ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
ALMOST CLOSED.
THEN, ONE DAY IN 1998, FATE
SAILED IN.
>> (translated): A SAILBOAT
WASHED UP ON THE BEACH OF RIACE.
THE PEOPLE ABOARD WERE KURDS
FROM IRAQ AND TURKEY.
FOR ME AND OTHERS, IT WAS A
SIGN.
>> Reporter: BAHRAM ACAR WAS
AMONG THE 200 KURDISH REFUGEES
CRAMMED ON THE BOAT DRIFTING
ACROSS THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA.
>> (translated): WE RAN OUT OF
FOOD, WE RAN OUT OF WATER.
IT WAS GETTING TOO HOT.
THE BOAT WAS SMALL, AND AT TIMES
WE WERE TAKING ON WATER.
I SLEPT FOR THREE DAYS, WITH
WATER TO MY KNEES.
I LIKED HOW WHEN THE SUN CAME
UP, I SAW THAT THE GEOGRAPHY WAS
LIKE A SECOND KURDISTAN.
I SAID, "I'M NOT GOING ANYWHERE.
I WANT TO STAY HERE."
>> Reporter: ACAR HAS LIVED HERE
EVER SINCE, BECOMING FLUENT IN
ITALIAN, RAISING A FAMILY AND
WORKING IN CONSTRUCTION.
THAT BOATLOAD OF KURDISH
REFUGEES 18 YEARS AGO WAS ALSO A
EUREKA MOMENT FOR MAYOR LUCANO.
RATHER THAN SEEING THEM AS A
THREAT OR A DISRUPTER, HE SAW
THEM AS THE TOWN'S FUTURE-- AN
OPPORTUNITY.
YOUNG REFUGEES IN SEARCH OF
BETTER LIVES NEEDED HOMES, AND
RIACE HAD HUNDREDS OF EMPTY ONES
TO FILL.
>> (translated): EVEN IF
YOU'RE HERE BY YOURSELF, YOU GET
YOUR OWN HOUSE.
BECAUSE THIS IS THE STRATEGY
THAT WE LAUNCHED FROM THE
BEGINNING.
THE WHOLE TOWN IS A MIGRANT
CENTER.
>> Reporter: NOT ONLY WOULD
REFUGEES GET THEIR OWN HOMES TO
LIVE IN, LUCANO STARTED A
PROGRAM TO TRANSFORM OTHER
ABANDONED HOUSES INTO ALL TYPES
OF ARTISTIC WORKSHOPS, GIVING
REFUGEES SKILLS TO HELP THEM
INDEPENDENTLY EARN A LIVING.
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES HAVE ALSO
FOUND WORK IN THE MAYOR'S OFFICE
AND OTHER MUNICIPAL JOBS.
OF COURSE, IT TAKES MONEY TO
MAKE ALL THIS HAPPEN.
THE ITALIAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
SUBSIDIZES RIACE AND TOWNS LIKE
IT THE EQUIVALENT OF $30 A DAY
FOR EVERY REFUGEE FOR ONE YEAR.
RIACE USES THE FUNDS TO RENOVATE
HOMES, HELP MIGRANTS START NEW
BUSINESSES, AND PAY THEM A
MONTHLY STIPEND.
OVER TIME, SEEING RESULTS LIKE
THIS HELPED PERSUADE SKEPTICAL
TOWNSPEOPLE THAT WELCOMING
MIGRANTS IS WORTH IT.
THIS WOMAN SAYS, "RIACE HAS
CHANGED FOR THE BETTER."
AND THIS CONVENIENCE STORE
MANAGER SAYS HE WOULD NOT BE
OPEN TODAY, IF IT WEREN'T FOR
ALL THE PURCHASES MADE BY
REFUGEES.
INCLUDING AN INFLUX OF 1,000
REFUGEES LAST YEAR, THE MAYOR
ESTIMATES BETWEEN 7,000 AND
AND 8,000 HAVE COME THROUGH
RIACE SINCE THE LATE '90s.
MOST HAVE CHOSEN TO STAY FOR
ONLY A SHORT TIME, EVENTUALLY
HEADING TO NORTHERN EUROPE,
WHERE THEY MAY HAVE FRIENDS OR
FAMILY, OR PERCEIVE BETTER
PROSPECTS.
DESPITE THE MAYOR'S BEST EFFORTS
TO ACCOMMODATE MIGRANTS,
SOMETIMES HE FALLS SHORT.
THESE MEN CAME FROM NIGERIA WITH
THEIR WIVES AND CHILDREN.
"LUCKY" HAS BEEN HERE SINCE THE
FALL OF 2014.
HE HAS A TWO-YEAR RESIDENCE
PERMIT--
>> THIS ONE IS MY RESIDENCE.
>> Reporter: --A PLACE TO LIVE,
AND A $200 A MONTH STIPEND FOR
EACH MEMBER OF HIS FAMILY.
BUT NEITHER LUCKY NOR HIS FRIEND
NEOSA--
>> THIS IS OF MY BABY.
>> Reporter: --HAVE BEEN ABLE TO
FIND STEADY WORK.
>> SO THE MOST PROBLEM WE HAVE
HERE IS A JOB.
A FAMILY MAN CANNOT LIVE WITHOUT
NO JOB.
>> I HAVE TO WORK.
THAT IS THE PROBLEM I'M CRYING
FOR.
>> Reporter: I ASKED THE MAYOR
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO THOSE
NIGERIAN MEN.
>> (translated): WITH RESPECT
TO ALL THE MIGRANTS WE WELCOME
HERE, WE DON'T HAVE THE
RESOURCES TO FIND WORK FOR EVERY
ONE OF THEM.
BUT WHAT I CAN SAY IS THAT NO
ONE HAS EVER LEFT BECAUSE THEIR
TEMPORARY JOB CAME TO AN END.
NO ONE HAS LEFT BECAUSE THE
STATE HAS TOLD US THAT THESE
PEOPLE NEED TO LEAVE.
THAT'S NEVER HAPPENED.
>> Reporter: MAYOR LUCANO SAYS
RIACE WILL CONTINUE HELPING AS
MANY REFUGEES AS IT CAN, AND HE
HOPES TO INSPIRE OTHER EUROPEAN
COMMUNITIES TO OPEN THEIR ARMS
TOO, TO PEOPLE CAUGHT IN MODERN
CONFLICTS WHO FOUND REFUGE IN A
MEDIEVAL TOWN.
>> Sreenivasan: BY 2050, THE
WORLD'S POPULATION WILL REACH
9.7 BILLION, ACCORDING TO U.N.
ESTIMATES.
THIS SUBSEQUENT INCREASE IN
DEMAND FOR MEAT PRODUCTS WILL
STRAIN THE ENVIRONMENT EVEN
FURTHER.
RESEARCHERS ALL OVER THE WORLD
SAY CONSUMERS MUST MOVE TO MORE
PLANT-BASED DIETS, AND THERE IS
EVEN A MOVEMENT TO HAVE INSECTS
REPLACE MEAT AS A SOURCE OF
PROTEIN AND IRON.
FOR THE MOST PART, THOUGH, THE
THOUGHT OF EATING BUGS HAS
LARGELY BEEN LIMITED TO A FEW
SELECT RESTAURANTS.
UNTIL NOW.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT AMY GUTTMAN HAS
THE STORY.
>> Reporter: AT THIS FOOD TRUCK
IN BRUSSELS, THERE ARE HEALTHY
PORTIONS OF PROTEIN IN THEIR
KABOBS, BURGERS, AND NACHOS, BUT
ONE INGREDIENT MAY SURPRISE YOU:
CRICKETS.
YES, THESE ARE SKEWERS OF
ROASTED CRICKETS WITH TOMATOES.
INCREASINGLY, IN EUROPE,
ADVENTUROUS EATERS,
ENTREPRENEURS, AND SCIENTISTS
ARE TOUTING INSECTS LIKE
CRICKETS, MEALWORMS AND
GRASSHOPPERS AS A NEW "SUPER
FOOD" FOR HUMANS BECAUSE SOME
INSECTS PROVIDE MORE PROTEIN
THAN MEAT, PLUS HIGH LEVELS OF
IRON, ESSENTIAL AMINO AND OMEGA-
THREE FATTY ACIDS.
>> I TRULY BELIEVE THAT IT CAN
BE AN ALTERNATIVE FOR MEAT,
BECAUSE IT'S MUCH MORE
ECOLOGICAL TO BREED INSECTS THAN
OTHER MEAT, AND IT TASTES GOOD.
>> Reporter: NIKOLAAS VIAENE
FARMS CRICKETS INDOORS IN THE
BASEMENT OF THIS BELGIAN
BUSINESS PARK.
IT TAKES HIM JUST 40 DAYS TO
RAISE THEM FROM LARVAE TO
ADULTS, AND BECAUSE CRICKETS ARE
SO TINY, VIAENE CAN BREED TENS
OF THOUSANDS IN THIS SMALL
SPACE, AS LONG AS HE'S ABLE TO
CONTROL THE HEAT AND HUMIDITY:
31 DEGREES CELSIUS, OR 88
DEGREES FAHRENHEIT, IS IDEAL.
WHAT ARE SOME OF THE BENEFITS OF
BOTH EATING AND BREEDING
CRICKETS?
>> TO MAKE THE SAME AMOUNT OF
PROTEIN AS A COW, CRICKETS NEED
25 TIMES LESS FOOD, 300 TIMES
LESS WATER, AND THEY PRODUCE 60
TIMES LESS GREENHOUSE GASES.
>> Reporter: VIAENE SAYS ANOTHER
BENEFIT OF BREEDING CRICKETS IS
THEY FEED ON BY-PRODUCTS
NORMALLY THROWN AWAY, LIKE
SOYBEAN HULLS AND CORN HUSKS.
BREEDING AND SELLING CRICKETS
FOR FOOD IS SO NEW, DIFFERENT
COUNTRIES HAVE DIFFERENT RULES.
IT'S NOT ALLOWED IN ITALY,
ICELAND, OR DENMARK.
IT IS LEGAL IN BELGIUM, THE
NETHERLANDS, THE U.K. AND THE
U.S.
WITH ALL THAT UNCERTAINTY, IN
YORK, ENGLAND, SCIENTIST ADRIAN
CHARLTON IS STUDYING THE USE OF
INSECTS IN ANIMAL FEED AS A
REPLACEMENT FOR SOYBEANS AND
FISHMEAL.
>> THE NUTRITIONAL PROFILE OF
INSECTS FOR USE IN CHICKEN FEED,
AS AN EXAMPLE, ARE ABSOLUTELY
PERFECT.
AS YOU CAN IMAGINE, CHICKENS
HAVE EVOLVED TO EAT INSECTS.
>> Reporter: CHARLTON SAYS MORE
THAN TWO BILLION PEOPLE, MAINLY
IN AFRICA AND ASIA, ALREADY EAT
BUGS AS PART OF THEIR DIET.
BUT DESPITE THE HEALTH BENEFITS,
HE ISN'T CONVINCED WESTERN TASTE
BUDS ARE READY TO SWALLOW
CRICKETS AND GRASSHOPPERS LIKE
VITAMINS.
CHARLETON THINKS INCORPORATING
INSECTS INTO OTHER PRODUCTS IS
THE PLACE TO START.
>> I CAN SEE, FOR EXAMPLE,
CRICKET FLOURS, OR FOODS--
PRODUCTS THAT ARE PRODUCED FROM
INSECTS THAT MAY NOT HAVE LEGS
AND WINGS, AND WHAT HAVE YOU,
BEING A LITTLE BIT MORE
ACCEPTABLE THAN EATING WHOLE
INSECTS AS A BULK DIETARY
SUPPLEMENT.
>> Reporter: A UNITED NATIONS
REPORT THREE YEARS AGO CITED
NEARLY 2,000 SPECIES OF EDIBLE
BUGS AS A POTENTIAL, PARTIAL
SOLUTION TO WORLD HUNGER.
>> BUT I'M NOT ENTIRELY
CONVINCED MYSELF THAT WE'LL SEE
INSECTS AS A MAINSTREAM FOOD.
NOW, INSECT PROTEIN OR INSECT
PRODUCTS WITHIN FOOD, I THINK,
IS MUCH MORE REALISTIC.
I WOULD ESTIMATE THAT WE'RE NOT
GOING TO SEE A HUGE DENT IN
EITHER MARKET, THE ANIMAL FEED
OR THE FOOD AREA, WITHIN THE
NEXT FIVE TO TEN YEARS.
>> Reporter: CRICKETS AND OTHER
INSECTS HAVE ALREADY CRACKED THE
KITCHEN AT LONDON RESTAURANT
ARCHIPELAGO.
CHEF DANIEL CREEDON SAYS 10% TO
15% OF HIS CUSTOMERS ORDER HIS
QUINOA, KALE AND CRICKET SALAD
EVERY WEEK.
YOU'RE ACTUALLY TRYING TO HELP
PEOPLE TO GET OVER THE ICK
FACTOR?
>> YES, WE'RE TRYING TO BE BOLD
ABOUT IT.
SO, WE WANT PEOPLE TO SEE WHAT
THEY'RE EATING AND TO GET OVER
THE NERVES, BECAUSE IT'S ONLY A
PSYCHOLOGICAL BLOCK.
>> Reporter: FOR DESSERT,
CREEDON SERVES CHOCOLATE-COVERED
LOCUSTS, AND MEALWORMS IN
CARAMEL SAUCE, HE JOKINGLY NAMED
"CAVIERR."
>> I DO THINK THEY ARE GOING TO
BECOME A PART OF OUR DIET.
I DON'T THINK IT'S NECESSARILY
GOING TO BE HOW WE SERVE THEM--
WHOLE INSECTS RIGHT UP.
FOR EXAMPLE, YOU CAN EXTRACT THE
PROTEIN FROM INSECTS, SO YOU
COULD END UP WITH SOMETHING VERY
SIMILAR TO TOFU, MADE FROM
INSECTS.
>> Reporter: IF AN INSECT MEAL
IS TOO MUCH TO FATHOM, THERE ARE
SNACKS MADE OF INSECTS.
SOME WERE ON DISPLAY AT THE
ANNUAL SPECIALTY AND FINE FOOD
SHOW IN LONDON.
THERE WERE BARBECUE-ROASTED
BUGS.
>> FOR THE GRASSHOPPER, WE JUST
RECOMMEND TO REMOVE THE WINGS
BECAUSE THE WINGS ARE VERY
SMALL.
>> IT'S LIKE A PRAWN.
>> Reporter: AND INSECT BARS.
>> THAT'S REALLY GOOD.
>> Reporter: DANISH ENTREPRENEUR
CHRISTINE SPLIID MAKES THESE
CROBARS-- COCOA AND PEANUT
BUTTER PROTEIN BARS MADE WITH
CRICKET FLOUR.
SINCE STARTING HER BUSINESS LAST
YEAR, SHE'S ADDED RASPBERRY AND
COFFEE FLAVORS.
DESPITE HAVING A SLIGHTLY EARTHY
TASTE, SPLIID DETECTS A SHIFT IN
PUBLIC ACCEPTANCE.
>> IT'S REALLY TASTY.
>> MANY MORE PEOPLE HAVE HEARD
ABOUT THE TRENDS OF INSECTS IN
FOOD, AND THAT'S BOTH AT THE
KIND OF HEALTH SHOWS WE'VE DONE,
ALSO THE MORE COMMERCIAL SHOWS.
>> Reporter: BACK IN HIS LAB,
ADRIAN CHARLTON ENVISIONS A
WORLD WHERE INSECTS NOT ONLY
SUPPLEMENT HUMAN DIETS, BUT ALSO
MEDICINE, WITH THE POTENTIAL TO
EXTRACT PROTEINS AND FATS TO
DEVELOP PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS.
>> INSECTS LIVE IN SOME VERY
TERRIBLE PLACES, AND THEIR
IMMUNE SYSTEM STANDS UP TO THAT.
WELL, WHY IS THAT?
THERE'S A WHOLE BODY OF RESEARCH
AROUND SOME OF THE MOLECULAR
DEFENSE MECHANISMS THAT INSECTS
HAVE AGAINST DISEASE, THAT MIGHT
PROVIDE US WITH NEW COMPOUNDS
AND NEW SOLUTIONS FOR THE
FUTURE.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SEASON
PREMIERE OF THE AWARD-WINNING
SERIES "INDEPENDENT LENS" IS
TOMORROW ON PBS, AND IT BEGINS
WITH THE REAL-LIFE CROSS-
CULTURAL COMEDY, "MEET THE
PATELS."
IT'S THE STORY OF RAVI PATEL, AN
INDIAN-AMERICAN ACTOR WHO ENTERS
INTO A LOVE TRIANGLE BETWEEN THE
WOMAN OF HIS DREAMS-- AND HIS
PARENTS.
HERE'S A LOOK.
>> OKAY.
>> BUT HOW ARE WE GOING TO SET
IT UP?
LET'S TALK ABOUT IT.
IT WON'T HAPPEN AUTOMATICALLY.
>> YEAH.
>> NO, NO, NO.
DO NOT DO THAT.
THAT IS WHEN YOU GO TOO FAR.
I'M TELLING YOU I AM GOING TO
TAKE CARE OF IT.
I DON'T WANT YOU GUYS JUMPING
AND GETTING ALL THESE OTHER
PEOPLE INVOLVED.
THAT'S WHEN IT BECOMES
EMBARRASSING.
>> WE WON'T DO ANYTHING YOU
DON'T WANT US TO DO, OKAY?
>> OKAY, JUST RELAX, THEN.
WE'RE DONE.
>> WHEN YOU TALK TO HER, SHE MAY
NOT KNOW WHY YOU ARE TALKING TO
HER.
DON'T BE SHY, TALK TO HER!
>> WE'LL SUPPORT YOU.
DON'T WORRY, WE'LL SUPPORT YOU.
>> I AM TELLING YOU, YOU GUYS
ARE TREATING ME LIKE I AM, LIKE,
SOCIALLY RETARDED.
I-- I AM VERY GOOD, SOCIALLY--
>> MARRIED, RIGHT.
>> DON'T JUST LOOK AT HER AND
SAY, NO, I DON'T LIKE HER.
>> I DON'T DO THAT!
YOU GUYS THINK I DO THAT.
DO YOU JUST-- YOU'RE SO
DESPERATE FOR ME TO LIKE SOMEONE
THAT YOU'RE JUST-- YOU DON'T
TRUST WHEN I MAKE MY OWN CHOICES
AND I GIVE EVERYONE A FAIR
CHANCE.
>> IF YOU DON'T LIKE SOMEBODY,
YOU'VE GOT TO GET TO KNOW
SOMEBODY.
WHY DO YOU LOVE MOM AND DAD?
BECAUSE YOU HAVE BEEN WITH THEM
FOR ALL OF THESE YEARS.
>> I DON'T LIKE YOU GUYS ANY
MORE.
>> LOOK IMPRESSED.
>> OKAY.
>> I MEAN, YOU KNOW WHAT WILL
HAPPEN?
IF YOU ARE NOT RIGHT, YOU CAN
BRING HER TO YOUR FRIEND WHO
MIGHT BE RIGHT FOR.
>> THIS IS THE MOST UNNECESSARY
PEP SPEECH I HAVE EVER HAD IN MY
LIFE.
>> YEAH, OKAY, LET'S GO.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY,
POLICE IN AUGSBURG, GERMANY SENT
OUT THE TWEET TONIGHT THAT
EVERYONE THERE HAD BEEN WAITING
FOR: "WE HAVE A GOOD MESSAGE FOR
CHRISTMAS."
THE GOOD MESSAGE WAS THAT
EXPERTS HAD SUCCESSFULLY DEFUSED
A MASSIVE TWO-TON BOMB, DROPPED
BY ALLIED AIRCRAFT DURING WORLD
WAR II, AND THAT MORE THAN
50,000 RESIDENTS WHO HAD BEEN
EVACUATED COULD NOW GO HOME.
IT WAS THE LARGEST SUCH
EVACUATION IN GERMANY SINCE THE
WAR ENDED.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.